# AngularJS - Filters

## Lesson Objectives

1. Alter presentation of data with filters

## Alter presentation of data with filters

Often, we want to format our data a specific way for presentation purposes. Sometimes, we can just do this with plain old HTML or CSS, but sometimes we have to figure out other ways to do so. Angular filters, for example, are a great way. Angular filters are used on the view level (i.e. the `.html` file where you're displaying said data). This is because typically, views deal with cosmetic changes or formatting of data, while controllers simply deal with collecting or fetching data. 

### Syntax 

So, how do you filter something in Angular? The basic syntax is as follows: 

```js
expression | filter 
```

Where the expression is what you want to filter, and the filter is how you want to filter it. 

### Built-in Filters 

Angular.js has a handful of helpfully [built-in filters](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/filter), for example: 

1. [uppercase](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/filter/uppercase) / [lowercase](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/filter/lowercase) 
	- Uppercases or lowercases the expression
	- e.g. `{{'octagon gem' | uppercase}}` would display on the page as 'OCTAGON GEM'
1. [limitTo](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/filter/limitTo)
	- Truncates a string to a specified amount 
	- e.g. `{{'My Description' | limitTo:8}}` would display on the page as 'My Descr'
1. [currency](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/filter/currency)
	- Formats the expression as money 
	- e.g. `{{product.price | currency }}` would display whatever number `product.price` is with a $ in front (for example, if product.price evaluated to 8, it would display '$8')
1. [date](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/filter/date)
	- Formats a JavaScript date object to whatever string format you specify
	- e.g. `{{1388123412323 | date:'MM/dd/yyyy @ h:mm:ssa'}}` would display on the page as '12/26/2013 @ 9:50:12PM'
1. [orderBy](https://docs.angularjs.org/api/ng/filter/orderBy)
	- Orders an array by some expression 
	- e.g. `<li ng-repeat="product in ctrl.products | orderBy:'price'">{{product.name}}</li>` would make the list display the products in order of increasing price 

### Quick Code-along 

Let's try some of these filters out! In today's `student_examples` there is some starter code for us to test these out in. Open it up and let's get started! 

#### Make Name of Store Upper Case

```js
{{ ctrl.storeName | uppercase }}
```

#### Limit How Many Letters Display on the Jingle

```js
{{ ctrl.jingle | limitTo: 8 }}
```

#### Format the date

```js
{{ctrl.date | date:'MM/dd/yyyy @ h:mm:ssa'}}
```

#### Format the price to currency

```js
{{product.price | currency}}
```

## Using Filter to Create a Search Box

Another neat thing we can do with Angular filters is create a search box quite easily!

In order to do so, the first thing you need to do is create the input search box, then give it an `ng-model` with some sort of variable name. For our example, let's name it `searchBox` 

Then, onto the html element that you want to filter through, all you have to do is simply pipe on: `filter: searchBox`, like so: 

```html
<label for="Search by">
	<input type='text' placeholder='Product name' ng-model='searchBox'>
</label>
<ul>
	<li ng-repeat="product in ctrl.products| filter: searchBox">{{ product.name}} :<span> {{product.price | currency}}</span></li>
</ul>

```

_NOTE:_ Your filter's ng-model variable name does _not_ have to be `searchBox`. If you want to name it differently, all you have to do is make sure that whatever you filter by matches the ng-model (i.e. `filter: variableToFilterByHere`)

## Create Sort Options

If you want the user to be able to sort a singular set of data in multiple different ways, for example letting them sort a list by low-to-high or high-to-low, or etc., you can do so utilizing `orderBy`.

For example, you can use radio inputs and set `ng-model` to some sort of variable, in our case we'll  name it 'order'. 

Then, for each radio input, you just have to set a `value` to however you want the data to be sorted when that radio input is selected.

Finally, onto the html element that you want to sort through dynamically, all you have to do is simply pipe on: `orderBy: order`, like so: 

```html
<div>
  <label for="price-up">Price Low to High</label>
  <input type="radio" name="order" value="price" ng-model='order' id="price-up"/>
  <label for="price-down">Price High to Low</label>
  <input type="radio" name="order" value="-price" ng-model='order'id="price-down"/>
  <label for="product-asc">Product Name</label>
  <input type="radio" name="order" value="name" ng-model='order' id="product"/>
</div>
<ul>
    <li ng-repeat="product in ctrl.products | orderBy: order | filter: searchBox">{{product.name}} : {{product.price | currency}}</li>
</ul>
```

_NOTE:_ Similar to the search box filter, your ng-model variable name does _not_ have to be `order`. If you want to name it differently, all you have to do is make sure that whatever you orderBy matches the ng-model (i.e. `orderBy: variableToOrderByHere`)
